If you've been swept away by The Secret,
get ready for the industrial strength version
of guided imagery.
Belleruth is one of the most gifted leaders in this field
and she's not content with anecdotal accolades.
She wants the hard science behind it.
While her work with clinical studies
in which her audio tapes have helped patients
to reduce bleeding and recover more quickly
is impressive in itself,
she has also helped 9/11 survivors cope with grief
as her CDs were distributed by the Red Cross.
In addition, she is helping war veterans
leave their horrifying pasts behind.
Meanwhile, the HMOs smell savings
and now use her work to quicken healing
so that hospital beds can turn more quickly.
Meet Belleruth.
(relaxing music)
What is wrong with visualization?
Well it's very misleading.
It's very misleading because it implies
that you have to see things
and only 55% of the population
has a strongly wired visual memory.
So that leaves people thinking, "Well I can't do that,"
when in fact they can because what you're really doing
is multisensory imagery using all of the senses
and probably for healing
the most potent and effective sense to use
is the kinesthetic sense,
which is felt sense in the body
and emotional sense, emotional,
the feelings and emotions associated with
whatever it is you're imagining.
Everybody feels.
Hopefully.
Well, almost everybody feels.
Right.
We're gonna talk about somebody
who lost his ability to feel for awhile
later in the interview,
which is an absolutely fascinating story.
You are a psychologist, how did you begin--
Clinical social worker.
Clinical social worker, okay.
How did you begin on this path of guided imagery?
Because it wasn't your initial chosen path.
You kind of back-ended into it, didn't you?
Well, I mean any good therapist uses imagery
or they're not a good therapist.
So I always wanted to be a therapist.
That was my idea of a great time.
And one of your jobs as a therapist
is to get under people's words
to what's really going on
because you can do some pretty fancy footwork
with your thinking and cognition.
So getting under words, you get to people's images,
to people's sort of core sensibilities
and that's kind of in the country I inhabit
as a guided imagery person.
Anything that stands out?
What sparked your very initial entry into the field?
Well, I think I'm kind of a space cadet by nature.
So I was a trancy kid, you know.
My mother would send me up to get my socks
and I'd just never come back.
(laughter)
'Cause I was lost in my own little fantasy world.
So I think I had a lot of that going on,
not too anchored.
So this was a natural marriage?
It was.
(laughter)
It was a natural marriage.
Well, what's interesting about your career
is you've gone from a space cadet
to actually being highly grounded
and now working with the medical communities
and working with large institutions, even the Red Cross
for post-traumatic stress disorder after 9/11,
and it's been a long journey.
And let's talk about some of the,
let's get into some of the science
of what you've learned along the way.
And if you want, you can leap right into the study,
I was listening to your talk earlier,
that was done with Henry Bennett.
Yes, UC Davis.
That study,
UC Davis, that was very interesting.
It is, it's actually an old study,
but it's really gotten so much rolling.
It's because of that study that Blue Shield of California
uses all of our stuff
and Kaiser Permanente does as well.
That's the groundbreaking study
and that's why I am so in love with research.
If you want people to get this stuff,
especially if you want them to get it free,
then you've got to have some grounded
evidence based research to show these institutions
to say not only is this a feel-good thing
that's going to make people feel much better,
but you're going to save money
and you're going to get a lot of loyalty
and patient satisfaction.
Kaching, that's the winning combination.
So that study was profound on a number of levels
because you're monitoring people
who are ready to undergo surgery,
but it also shows the distinction between
all these different healing modalities,
guided imagery, visualization,
and Hemi-Sync and a lot of different modalities
side by side in their effects.
So let's launch right into the study and what was found
through these models.
That's right.
It's not just this great big basket
of Fruit Loop interventions that are interchangeable.
There are several ways to look at this.
This was a gold standard study.
It was with 335 patients and it was randomized,
double-blinded, and placebo controlled.
So it's as good as it gets
and those numbers are big enough
to yield robust findings.
So what we found was people were randomly assigned
four different audio interventions.
The first was an instructional tape by Henry Bennett,
the investigator himself,
the second was affirmations by Linda Rogers,
very finely built affirmations,
the third was a Hemi-Sync tape, which is audio tones
that are delivered alternately into different ears
at different frequencies
thus driving the brain into a state of automatic relaxation,
and as a last minute throw in
there was a guided imagery tape that I had produced
that used imagining good outcomes as the way to go.
There was also a control, a pink noise,
whoosh whoosh tape. (laughs)
It had nothing in it but "whoosh, whoosh"?
Yeah, for the same number of minutes,
which you need to do if you have a gold standard study.
And there was also a group of people
who were given a tape, but never listened,
and they became a wonderful other kind of control group.
Relaxed or in denial. (laughs)
Either way they were
an important part of the control.
So what happened in this study?
There were, as a recall, about 350, 60 some people
in the study?
335.
Okay, 335.
Yes, they had very long, bloody, extended surgeries,
complicated surgeries that lasted seven to nine hours.
Those were the days.
This was 1995, six, seven, something like that.
So these were the days when people
actually stayed in the hospital for a number of days
and they measured things like blood loss,
pre and postoperative anxiety,
and length of stay in the hospital.
And much to Henry's dismay,
what he found was the instructional tape
was helpful on all those levels--
Let's talk about those four different models
first a little bit.
Okay.
You have kind of a subtitle
for each of the models.
Yeah, okay.
So Henry's model
where logic rules.
Logic rules.
The idea is if you explain to people
what they're about to experience,
it'll give them a sense of control
and that in and of itself will make them do better
and I call that the knowledge is power model
and I happen to agree that knowledge is power.
I'm all about knowledge.
But it doesn't help when you're terrified.
It's too cognitive, it's too much up here.
It's not going to hit the part of your brain
that's terrified, which is the survival structures,
the lower brain, the brain stem, the mid brain.
These are the places where terror pings.
So if you want to hit people and affect their fear levels,
knowledge is only gonna get you so far
and that's what the study showed.
What about affirmations?
Affirmations.
Stuart Smalley.
Stuart Smalley.(laughs)
I am good enough.
I'm good enough.
(laughter)
There's something, I'm good enough,
I'm something else enough, and people like me.
I love Stuart Smalley.
I do too.
(laughter)
He's the most dear character.
Anyway, that wasn't just a spoof.
That was a brilliant piece of theater.
Anyway, I digress.
The affirmations were helpful,
but same as the instructional tape,
not at a statistically significant level except for anxiety
and I think that's also because
it's wrote cognitive reprogramming and you need--
Brainwashing, i.e. cognitive brainwashing.
Yes, exactly.
And I call that the fake it till you make it model
and it's a perfectly legitimate model
except you need more time than two days.
People got these tapes two days before their surgery.
They listened to it an average of 2.5 times.
That was actually the imagery tape.
Most of them they listened to it an average of 1.5 times.
Okay so affirmations
are not going to work 1.5 times.
Probably not.
So the next model, Hemi-Sync.
Hemi-Sync drives the brain,
produces automatic relaxation.
I call that the technology rules model
and it was very effective at producing relaxation.
It in fact relaxed people more than anybody
and they also bled the most.
And we'll talk about that in just a sec.
Let's just go to the very last one, which is--
Last one's the guided imagery,
deliberate directed daydreaming.
I actually don't have a name for that,
probably because it's my intervention.
But it's a kind of reverie state that's highly strategic
and is very focused
and uses healing words,
soothing music, certain kind of voice tone,
and these images.
And you are the maestro.
I've heard a lot of, through the last 30 years,
I've heard a lot of guided imagery tapes and so forth.
Yours are certainly the most refined and effective
and go right to the heart of the matter
and the heart of you.
I mean, they're absolutely exquisite.
Thank you.
And it's your language.
So that said--
It's also the music.
And the music.
It's awesome.
The music that you have there embedded is,
it's just perfect.
I fired four composers till I found Steve Kohn
and we've been working together for 20 years.
What a duo.
So now let's go back to the bleeding part.
After this study was completed,
let's look at what the findings were
with these four modalities.
Well all the modalities produced relaxation.
However, for blood loss,
the controls, the average blood loss for the controls
was 3500 cc's.
The guided imagery group was 200.
So it was 150 cc's less.
That is wildly significant.
Wildly.
Yeah.
The others did not do that.
What about Hemi-Sync?
Hemi-Sync, 500 cc's.
That's, what is that, 150 over the controls.
Yes.
Now, that's really surprising,
yet you explain it in such a way
that it makes absolutely perfect sense.
Now, can you put that kind of relaxation side by side
with the guided imagery, which got the best results
in terms of the bleeding factor?
Yeah, I mean I think they both produce relaxation,
but the Hemi-Sync had no content.
It was absolutely content-free.
It was just this mechanical way of getting the brain
to get the body to relax
and in the absence of content.
First of all, everything relaxes
including your blood vessels and so they open wider
and you're going to bleed more.
But the other point is, and this was the point actually--
That's true, every single of aspect of you
would just automatically relax.
Yes, absent mediating suggestions in a relaxed state
where you're very receptive,
saying you're not going to bleed.
So which is what the guided imagery did.
You're in this very relaxed state, but in this relaxed state
you're perceiving yourself bleeding less.
The other piece that was what Henry Bennett thought
was that you don't wanna be just relaxed before surgery
or before any anxiety producing or exertional effort.
You want to be like an athlete.
You want to be calm
and energized and prepared
and feeling ready
and there's a certain, it's a different energy
of being relaxed but energized and good to go
and that's how people get with this guided imagery.
They go from terror to (claps) let's go.
Well the way you did it,
I can see why it had such success
even if it was only listened to 2.5 times.
You let the audience hear a little sample of it,
the part specifically that referred to the bleeding,
done very subtly, very lovingly, very supportively.
So you're zinging that in when a person has already
been put in a very protected, loving place.
Right.
And a realistic place.
Talk about that part.
Well, yeah.
Basically, sometimes you get some of these guided imagery
meditations that are basically saying, you know,
and your surgeon loves you,
loves you, which is--
(laughter)
The mind's not gonna buy that one.
No, it's like, and you don't want a surgeon who loves you.
You want a surgeon who wants to do a very good job
and is not so emotionally attached to you
that they're gonna get nervous.
Right, to cut you.
Yes, to cut you.
So I think that's basically, that's the difference.
And it does produce this real state of readiness.
Relaxed readiness.
More appropriate than just having your blood vessels
and everything else relaxing.
That's right.
Let's talk about some of the other effects
that happened in terms of where the control group comes in
in a little bit, some of the other outcomes of that study.
Oh yes, okay.
Well the whoosh, whoosh people didn't do so well.
I mean, those were the 350.
That was sort of like the baseline median thing.
But the group who got a tape and didn't use it,
and we assume that's because either
they just use denial very effectively
in their life as a defense
and it's like, "I'm not gonna think about it, it'll be fine"
and for some people, you should not mess with it.
That works.
(laughter)
They did as well as the guided imagery people.
But it also could be that there was a group of people
who just had a sort of sense of deep optimism
or maybe they were religious and were using prayer,
but basically they said, "I'm cool."
They did great, so I'm not saying--
That's interesting.
It is.
(laughter)
And I'm certainly not saying that guided imagery
is something everybody needs or should do
'cause if you're using denial
and you're not thinking about it,
you don't wanna listen to something
that reminds you what's gonna happen next week.
If denial works for you, absolutely.
Sometimes I'm big on that actually.
Me too.
(laughter)
Now, you mentioned Blue Shield
a little while ago and let's talk about
some of the other HMOs that have gotten on board with this
and what they're finding
and also the whole subject of men.
I mean, this seems to be, like the audience today,
it's heavily dominated by female presence.
But let's talk about men, they go in surgery too.
Yes, and when they get a CD,
now it's a CD or a download,
from Blue Shield say or Kaiser of northern California,
which also does this now,
they basically get told by some trusted caregiver,
"Here, you might want to try listening to this.
"We think it could help you with your experience."
And it's 50/50 men and women,
anybody facing surgery.
So as I said earlier this morning,
there are no atheists in foxholes.
There are no men who don't like guided imagery
right before a nasty surgery.
So it's exciting to see.
The other thing I didn't mention, that I should say,
when Blue Shield tested,
went back and did retrospective testing
of people who had hysterectomies,
it was about 300 people for this one year,
the women who had,
and this was good data because it was roughly same age,
basically healthy people for the most part, and all women,
so there was a little nice little control population there.
The people who had surgery who listened to guided imagery
cost the HMO an average of, are you ready?
$2,003 and seven cents per procedure.
So it's like duh.
You get a bulk order
of these CDs that are gonna cost you,
what, seven dollars a piece,
and you save 2,003.
It's like, do the math.
Amazing.
And that's why Kaiser's doing them now.
Kaiser's been pretty progressive
about jumping on.
They've been great.
They want to do what's going to work
because they're looking to save on their overhead
just like everybody else.
It's a fixed cost.
But I also have to say this.
The people that I've worked with,
at both Blue Shield and at Kaiser,
they also care about the patients' experience
and they want people to feel empowered
and be introduced to these techniques
'cause it's good for them.
So this is great that you've been able
to break into the medical industry, which is--
The research.
Right, because of the research.
Let's talk about something that is also a medical,
it is related medically, but it also is a source
of great personal pain for a lot of people,
and that's the whole subject of weight loss.
People spend gajillions of dollars on weight loss
guided imagery and visualization tapes
and books and everything else.
What is the missing element?
Because most of the people
don't lose the weight and keep it off.
What's wrong with the way this culture
is going about trying to lose weight?
Well, don't get me off on the culture
because, I mean, we're nuts about weight in this culture.
Yeah, we are nuts,
but go ahead and launch on the culture.
I mean, let's talk about it.
It's totally skitzy.
I mean, people are obsessed with weight,
as a result they're focused on weight,
and possibly as a result they can't stop
doing everything wrong for themselves.
But I remember after I worked on this imagery
I was, I used to be a very skinny kid,
so weight really wasn't in my field of vision.
I didn't think about it much.
But after I got done with the research
and I saw how crazy people were
and how they beat themselves up over their weight,
for the next three years,
every time I gave a keynote,
I introduced myself by giving my age and my weight.
Oh, interesting.
(laughter)
I always got a standing ovation too.
But anyway, yes, but it was sort of like yes,
this is what 168 pounds looks like.
It isn't so bad.
You know, get over it.
Anyway.
So but basically,
I think what we do wrong
with any kind of motivational sort of coaching
or nagging or encouraging or
is we talk only to this part of the brain.
It's the same thing that I was saying
about the terror with surgery.
This part of the brain can understand what you need to do,
it can make perfect logical sense,
but it doesn't cohere the whole human being
behind the intention to do something different
and it's also it tends to be preachy,
little bit like this,
and we know, motivational psychologists know
that you want to encourage somebody to do something
you use the carrots, not the sticks.
So with this imagery, what I do,
oh and the other thing about weight loss
is people start really disliking themselves.
There's a certain loagy, fatiguey depression that goes--
Low self esteem ends up at the root of it.
And dislike of the body,
which is a killer for weight loss.
The best place to start, if you possibly can,
is liking your body or liking something about your body
because you've gotta be in an alliance with your body,
not at war.
So the imagery allows people to,
actually I use very accurate physiological imagery
about how the body converts fat to energy and I,
it's like this is resources in the bank
and you're just going to put them to use
behind heat, growth, power, strength,
motivation, action
so that it's getting the whole person behind
this conversion of fat to energy.
And I try to portray the way the enzymes
and the proteins and the fat
sort of does this exquisite dance of creation in the body
to release these fabulous resources
so that listening to it,
you couldn't help but be taken with the genius of your body.
So it's sort of a starting place
to start liking your own flesh.
And the other thing I do is I try to have people imagine
moving as a pleasure, which is of course
all of us had that experience as kids.
Kids don't move to get exercise.
They move because they like it.
So remembering the feel of your body in motion
and the pleasure of that.
So I try to get more behind
the positive stuff about losing weight
and it's a good place to start,
it's a good motivational place to start
when you're about to embark
on a new behavioral program,
which by the way, goes very nicely with this.
There's a very nice collaboration between
the imagery and other things.
What kind of results have you seen
in the weight loss arena?
We had a wonderful pilot study at Canyon Ranch.
It was six weeks.
It was the staff 'cause they were going to use this
on their, what do you call them?
You don't call them clients.
The people who come and stay there.
Guests.
(laughter)
Thank you.
They were going to use this on their guests.
So they did it.
So there were, I think there were 16 staff people
who were being encouraged
to do behavioral things differently.
But one group were randomly assigned
the imagery
and the other group just got the music
behind the imagery, but no imagery.
So they both had the same amount of time
listening to audio, but one had this imagery component
and that group lost twice as much weight,
exactly twice as much weight,
within eight weeks, within eight weeks.
So now it's too small a sample.
It's too small a sample.
It's still impressive.
It is impressive, but it can be skewed
because one person could lose a ton of weight
and bring up the whole average for everybody else.
So those numbers aren't very impressive statistically,
but yes, and pretty soon everybody started talking
to each other and they said, "We want the other tape."
You know, "To hell with this music stuff.
"Give me the imagery."
But you found that there was also a certain
cut-off point in terms of the amount of weight loss
where guided imagery works fabulously for what,
the average person who says I have to lose 15, 20 pounds.
Yes, that's great.
It works great for that.
It's terrific.
It's, and actually this is consistent with other findings
for other techniques.
With morbidly obese people
who are really having struggles
with 250, 350 pound weight,
it won't work beyond 25 pounds
just like everything else doesn't work.
There's something metabolic that's different
as a result of carrying the weight
that makes it very hard to lose beyond a certain point.
But up to 25 seems to work pretty well.
25 is good, 25 is good.
25's good.
Let's get into another area
before we get to the big one you're into now.
Just briefly if we can touch through
what you do with people who are ready
to make their transition to the other side--
In other words, die, right.
Yes, the physical--
Say the die word, yes.
Yes, actually it's another place
where imagery has a unique contribution to make
because this is something it's very hard to talk about.
Most people struggle with what could be good about this
except the very religious people
who do feel that there's something very good
waiting for them.
And so basically you can use imagery
to help people
resolve relational issues
that have been hanging over their heads.
This is often what keeps people hanging on.
You know, the absence of an apology
or the worry about somebody
that you want to really advise them
or give them the gift of your wisdom to
and they're not listening to it.
So you know, resolving relationships.
You can do that in this magical space of the imaginal world
and you can sort of feel completed,
whether that person is there or not.
You know, and one could argue that they are there,
they're that a different level.
So you do get, you can take people through this process
of asking for forgiveness, providing forgiveness,
giving advice, giving a great big hug,
and then seeing themselves as divesting themselves
of their great love for all of these people
that keep them attached here
so that you can move on,
not loving them any less,
but lighter because you're not carrying it.
And there's reassurance
to the people who are being left behind in hearing this
and also that the idea that this is a point of great peace
and calm and they can let go of you
because they know that this is waiting for you too.
Well now, do you have them
listen to it privately?
Do they listen privately with headsets or in their rooms?
Do they listen to it with their maybe loved ones near them
so you're having this experience together?
How does that work?
Often, I mean I didn't have any fixed idea in my head,
but what I've heard back
is it's often with people in the room,
the whole family listens, and it's--
Very beautiful.
Thank you.
I heard, you let us hear an excerpt of it
and there were a lot of moist eyes in the room,
but it was a beautiful kind of moist eye.
Yes, I think people also use this to resolve
other losses that have happened quite awhile ago.
I think the people who are crying in the room,
and there were a lot of, there was a lot of sniffling,
often that's because people are thinking about
people they've lost, but in this different framing of it
so that--
Very lovely framing.
Yeah, it's a cushioned, sweet,
reassuring frame for it
that I hope isn't so schmaltzy
that people don't believe it.
No, no, no your professionalism comes through.
I mean, it's not schmaltzy,
but it is definitely heart touching.
I want to get to the area
that you're really involving yourself in now,
which is post-traumatic stress syndrome
and this encompasses everything from
veterans returning from war,
who are in a severe state of emotional and physical shock,
to people who've been in car accidents
and everything in between.
Can you go ahead and just begin,
whatever's interesting you in this
and you mentioned many things in there
and I want to finally get to the story of Andy at the end,
but maybe start with the Duke--
Study.
We have a big study going on right now
funded by the Department of Defense
where women veterans
who are suffering from military sexual trauma,
which is hideous.
It's hideous because most of them
have been repeatedly assaulted,
usually by their superior officers,
and they have combat stress as well.
So it's in this horrible situation
where you're feeling unsafe anyway
and then the person who's supposed to be your protector
is your predator and it's going on all the time
and you can't talk about it because
then you get punished even more.
So these are cases of very severe post-traumatic stress
and basically the women are given,
they're randomly divided,
but they're given...
a 12 week course of self-administered
guided imagery downloads.
Starts off with something that's rather simple
and self-regulating, neutral,
just very cushioned imagery
so that they start to get very good at using this technique
to calm themselves down when they start to get
this emotional arousal
and then they switch to the much more intense
guided imagery for traumatic stress
where you basically enter your broken heart,
you see your symptoms as landscape,
and then you dive even deeper into yourself
to a place that is truly undiminished
by all these horrible things that have happened.
And there's sort of a quasi soul retrieval
that happens in there.
It's hard to describe.
It sounds a little strange just describing it,
but it works as a story
and it works as an imaginary hero's journey.
So they get the 12 weeks of guided imagery,
listening to it once a day.
There's no therapist.
There's a social worker who introduces it to them
and then she calls once a week to say,
"Are you listening to your imagery?
"How's it going?"
That's it.
The results of these 12 weeks
have phenomenal reductions in symptoms
in all three symptom clusters of PTSD
and they're comparable to the best kind of cognitive
behavioral treatment we have for PTSD
with a therapist for 12 weeks.
So again--
For the price of a download.
Exactly, or bootleg, which is no price. (laughs)
And that excites the practical side of my brain
that says we could be doing this everywhere.
This is totally feasible.
Anyway, so that was very exciting.
And as I said earlier, the symptom clusters,
one big one is arousal,
which means big spikes in terror or fury,
which is the result of these
insanely swinging neuro hormones
that are going back and forth
and one side of the pendulum is intense,
adrenergized, activated emotions
that are mostly terror and fury.
So that's one symptom cluster
that had marked, statistically significant reduction
very much like cognitive behavioral therapy.
And on the other side, another symptom cluster
is numbing and avoidance.
You're kind of stoned on endogenous opioids,
which is the body's way of trying to mediate
these crazy adrenaline symptoms.
So you're kind of gorked out,
you look stoned, your concentration is bad,
and you're out of it and you're isolated
and you don't talk to people and you avoid things,
you don't go to work, or you go to work
and you keep your door shut the whole time,
or you don't leave the house.
So that's the other side.
Those symptoms were also alleviated
very much the same as cognitive behavioral therapy.
The really exciting thing is
the symptom cluster that is traditionally
the hardest to treat, the stickiest to stick around,
the stuff that doesn't go away,
which is called reexperiencing,
that's flashbacks, nightmares, and intrusive thoughts.
Those were the most dramatically improved
and that's amazing, but it makes sense
because the imagery goes to the part of the brain
that is producing these horrible images
and it's kind of bumping them out of there
with different images that are much more healing
and speak to the issue.
Andy,
which is one very dramatic,
it's a powerful story.
It's a heartbreaking story.
It's a heartbreaking story,
but a very powerful story
to look at the degree to which this can be effective
in even some of the most horrific situations.
Yes.
So if you could just tell Andy's story.
The Andy story.
Well, Andy was in a group of Vietnam veterans
who were what we call dual diagnosis.
They were all in recovery for massive substance abuse
and had been through a program that dried them out
and then if they qualified they entered this
called Transcend Vietnam program.
This was at the Louis B. Stokes VA Hospital
in Brecksville, Ohio.
So Andy was one of these guys,
very, very much a leader.
He was so tuned into himself
and he was so authentic
that he was a natural leader.
And as I said this morning,
he's the kind of person you would pay
to have in your therapy group
'cause he catalyzes all kinds of movement
and speaks for everybody and tells the truth
and you could tell, even though I think at the time
he was in his 40's, now he's in his 50's,
but oh maybe he's in his 60's.
Anyway, whatever he was,
he 'was like an 18-year-old kid still.
You could see where he got his development was arrested
and he still had this sort of sweet, unformed
18-year-old blue collar kid flavor to him
that was very appealing.
Anyway, so Andy's in this group
and at some point in the group,
the group all becomes very skilled at guided imagery,
they do a lot of other things, they do journaling,
but one of the things they do
is towards the end of the group,
and it was an eight-week group,
they talk about their trauma or some core traumas
and Andy never knew until the last minute
whether he was even gonna talk about this
because he had never talked about it,
it was so horrible.
But at the very tail end of the final session
he tells his story, which is
he's walking point, which is what you do
when you send somebody out ahead of everybody else
to make sure that things are safe for the group to proceed.
He was one of these guys who became
sort of wildly, mystically attuned to the environment.
He could smell danger.
He was so, and he would become elated at this job.
Nobody else wanted to walk point,
but he always volunteered.
And he had this very attuned
and exquisite sensibility walking point
and I think that's because he had so much adrenaline
going through him that he was in this psychic,
intuitive state of mind.
Anyway, and people thought he was crazy
'cause he would walk point not with a machine gun,
but with a single rocket launcher because
(laughs) okay.
But basically everybody thought Andy was nuts,
but they always liked it better when he walked point
'cause they knew that they were safe with him,
in his little 18-year-old hands.
Anyway, so he had this unique role in his group
and at one point, this was the trauma,
they come across a 10-year-old girl
who was not supposed to know any Americans were there.
They knew that if she was allowed to live
that she would reveal their location,
hundreds of troops would be killed.
So they were being, basically this group of men
were being given a choice
that no one should ever have to make
and they tied her up to a tree.
They tried, nobody knew what to do,
so they just shuffled around.
Nobody wanted to hurt her.
And as usual, Andy, in his leadership way,
stepped, came forward,
everybody else backed off,
got as far away from there as they could,
and he just squatted
about a foot and a half away from this girl
and just stared her in the eye
and was trying to sort of commune with her
and see what her intentions were,
if there was anything they could do to let her go.
And they had this intense eyeball to eyeball contact
and basically what he saw was
this steely, flinty little warrior girl
who was basically looking him in the eye
and saying with her eyes, "Go to hell."
So he knew that this was the problem
and at some point, he doesn't,
and he also felt that this was a perfect mirror.
This was, he was looking at himself,
this incredibly intelligent
and vitally courageous little girl.
So at some point, and he isn't sure what it was,
it might have been 10 minutes, it might have been an hour,
he slit her throat with his knife
and walked back to the other men
with her blood on his hands
and they wouldn't look at him.
Nobody spoke about it.
They never spoke about it and they just kept going.
And Andy's traumatic, intrusive memory
and his nightmares and his flashbacks
were of this little girl's eyes,
staring at him, following him, accusing him,
and never giving him a moment's peace,
asleep or awake.
So Andy basically did some imagery,
one-on-one imagery in the room
where he met with this girl again
and he asked her forgiveness,
told her his great sorrow about having done his regret,
about having done what he did to her,
telling her how much he admired her courage
and her strength and her steeliness
and how much he connected to that
and basically told her he was sorry,
he was so sorry.
And the shift came when right after doing that imagery.
What he reported was
the girl's eyes were still following him,
but they were eyes of forgiveness,
they were very sorrowful,
and they were basically eyes that said,
"I know what you've been through
"and you shouldn't have had to have been through this."
And so they were not just,
they weren't these eyes that accused him.
He now had eyes that were his companions
and provided him with huge solace.
And I have to tell you, this was a long time ago
that I heard this story.
This was like in close to I think it was 1999.
But I just got a picture of Andy,
that's not his real name,
I just got a picture of Andy and his new girlfriend
in his location, in his new city,
and he just looked like a different person.
He didn't look like an 18-year-old kid anymore.
He looked like a guy.
He looked like a guy almost his own age
and very happy
and a very sweet note.
Aw, very sweet note.
Now that's something that, as you say,
no one should have to live through.
No.
And yet, even he was able to turn this into
an experience that ended up being his friend.
Yes, and it allowed him to forgive himself.
And let me tell you, this is not that unusual an experience.
Our guys are coming home from Afghanistan and Iraq
having had to make these choices
or having been completely in some kind of war fog,
out of control, doing things they never would have done--
And they take it home.
And you're talking violence at home,
you're talking a lot of problems.
Yeah, and suicide at home,
and self hatred at home,
and absolute disconnect from self at home.
And these things need to be addressed
in a way that helps.
Talking about it won't help.
Most of these people can't talk about it.
Yesterday at a workshop, someone came up to me
and said that her son, who came back from Iraq,
got the guided imagery
and he's listened to it 700 times.
That's all he wants to do.
Now, some people do that.
They just listen to it over and over again
until it thunks in and makes the shift.
It's probably the only relief.
Yeah.
But other people, and other people find it
a little bit too intense right away.
They have to titrate the dosage.
They listen to it a little bit more each day.
And other people,
other people don't need it.
Other people come home and there's something
in their nervous system and their biochemistr
that settles out.
A lot of this is physiologic.
I've read about this, the phenomena,
I read about it recently in the paper,
that the people who choose combat,
for example, the really intense forms,
the SEALs, Green Berets and so forth,
don't experience this kind of stress in their beings.
They're prepared for it, they're wired for it,
they're ready for it.
Those who are drafted,
those who end up there when they thought
they were gonna just be in Fort Dix or whatever,
whole different deal.
Right, that's true.
Didn't really up for this
and they're not prepared.
For the most part, but not,
there are so many anomalies that even to say
there are Marines, there are SEALS who get PTSD,
but it does, generally speaking, take more.
Women are twice as likely to get PTSD as men.
Children are twice as likely to get PTSD as adults.
Some of it has to do with just the neurophysiology,
the way the brain is wired,
and the way the biolchemicals get mixed.
So a lot of it's in the hardwiring
and people tend to blame themselves for getting PTSD.
They say, "Oh I should have known,"
or for whatever happened they should have known better,
"I should have been smarter, I should have been wiser."
It's not a choice.
And this is something that encompasses
all of the truly shocking events of our lives,
whether it is a car accident
or whether it's even emotional trauma
that's been introduced.
Yeah, it has to be something,
I mean to qualify as a catalyst for PTSD,
it has to be something that turns your life upside down
and leaves you absolutely without the platform
you normally stood on,
you know, without your self identity.
It just shifts something huge about yourself
and that could be 9/11, it could be Hurricane Katrina.
Weren't your CDs handed out
by the Red Cross?
Yes.
Is that correct?
By the Red Cross and by John Jay College of Criminal Justice
to early responders and survivors at 9/11
and for the people working on the pile
for like years afterwards.
And they're still being handed out.
There's a lot of the post-traumatic stress from 9/11
is just emerging now because it does go underground
in many instances
and so people who think they're doing okay
all of the sudden one day, maybe five years later,
boom.
So there's a lot of people just reporting PTSD now.
Would you say that on some level,
to much lesser degrees
and not to qualify for that particular label,
but most all of us have some kind of trauma
and wounds in our lives that are unresolved.
We all certainly have huge losses
and greatly stressful experiences,
but post-traumatic stress is a very unique configuration
of hideous stuff
and for reasons that sometimes seem arbitrary.
It gets distinguished from acute stress.
So for instance, after a hurricane
or a cyclone that are very destructive,
almost everybody is going to have acute stress
and insane hormone levels
from four to eight months afterwards,
but for most people it settles down in and of itself.
People who go on to get PTSD,
it just never, the cycling never stops
and there's something about
sort of an irritated neuronal network
or maybe some inherited hardwiring
that just makes some people more vulnerable
and there are some things that make people
less vulnerable.
So, I'm sorry go ahead.
I was telling you there's a big study of nightclub fires
that show that people who are inebriated do not get PTSD
even if they had a horrific experience
and just got out with their lives
and are burned horribly, they still don't get PTSD
if they were drunk.
That makes sense, that makes sense
because it wasn't striking them emotionally
in that shocking manner as if you were--
Or I would take it even a step more primitively
and say there was some substance
in their bloodstream that interfered
with this flooding of biochemicals that normally occurs
that gets this whole thing rolling.
Absolutely.
Well, where are you headed right now
with your work in this area?
Well, we're extending the study
and now at the Durham VA Hospital
the next study has, the extended study,
has started with many more people,
more kinds of trauma.
We're taking functional MRIs of their brains
before this and after.
We expect to see differences.
And we're taking a very complicated
neurosteroid markers in the blood before and after
so that we can really point to some very basic shifts
that happen as a result of listening to guided imagery.
We're also, I'll be part of a project that is training
these ill-prepared National Guard's men,
some Army, and some Marines,
better prepared Marines and Army,
at Fort Carson in Colorado before they're deployed
to see if by teaching them imagery,
yoga, acupressure, will that help them?
Will it mitigate symptoms of PTSD?
Will it inoculate them?
We don't know, but we think it might.
We know it helps after.
Maybe it could help before.
So very exciting. (laughs)
Thank you.
You're welcome.
I found her CDs to be exquisite
both in quality and content.
Just go to her website below to access meditations
for more than 40 different conditions.
Now, other interviews you would likely find interesting
are those with Teri Mahaney, John Demartini,
and Robert Tennyson Stevens,
all available here on CMN.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(relaxing music)